# Apache Archiva Databases

## Apache Archiva Database

Archiva uses an external database for one purpose:

- As a default user store for security

Generally, it is unnecessary to configure anything - the built in embedded database is suitable for the artifact management, and if
an external authentication mechanism is not needed, the user database.

However, it is possible to configure an external database as needed.

## Configuring an external database

Archiva uses JNDI data sources to locate the databases to use:

- `jdbc/users` - the user store

Configuring an external database for either or both of these sources depends is configured in `jetty.xml` if you are using the
[standalone installation](./standalone.html), or in the application server configuration if you are using the [web application installation](./webapp.html).

By default the archiva and users databases are stored in the `databases` directory where Archiva is installed. To change the
path, just edit all instances of the "DatabaseName" property in `conf/jetty.xml` (see below).

**Note:** If you are using MySQL as your database, Archiva fails when the users database created is initially set to UTF-8 for the character encoding.
As a workaround, set the database to UTF-8 encoding after it has been populated. See [MRM-1373](http://jira.codehaus.org/browse/MRM-1373) for more details.

```
<!-- omitted xml -->

<New id="users" class="org.mortbay.jetty.plus.naming.Resource">
  <Arg>jdbc/users</Arg>
  <Arg>
    <New class="org.apache.derby.jdbc.EmbeddedDataSource">
      <Set name="DatabaseName">/path/to/database/directory/users</Set>
      <Set name="user">sa</Set>
      <Set name="createDatabase">create</Set>
    </New>
  </Arg>
</New>

<New id="usersShutdown" class="org.mortbay.jetty.plus.naming.Resource">
  <Arg>jdbc/usersShutdown</Arg>
  <Arg>
    <New class="org.apache.derby.jdbc.EmbeddedDataSource">
      <Set name="DatabaseName">/path/to/database/directory/users</Set>
      <Set name="user">sa</Set>
      <Set name="shutdownDatabase">shutdown</Set>
    </New>
  </Arg>
</New>
<!-- omitted xml -->
```

## Backing up the database

While it is a good idea to back up both databases, it is not strictly necessary to back up the repository database on a regular basis. Should any
data loss be suffered, this database can be regenerated by deleting it's contents and re-scanning the repositories.

If you are using the default user security mechanism, it is important to back up the users database on a regular basis to ensure that the user
passwords and information are not lost in the event of corruption. With the default embedded storage this is simply a matter of making a copy of
the database directory on the filesystem. If you have configured an external database as the source for user information, please refer to your
database documentation for backup instructions.

## MySql setup

```
  create database archiva character set utf8;

  GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON archiva.* TO 'archivauser'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'archivauserpassword'
```

Replace "archivauser" and "archivauserpassword" with a username and password of your choice. If Archiva is not running on the same server as your MySQL database server, replace "localhost" with the hostname or IP address of the Archiva server.
